---
title: "Statistical Causal Inference"
collection: teaching
role: "Course Designer and Instructor"
course_id: "SESP 310"
permalink: /teaching/2020-SESP310
venue: "Northwestern University"
semester: "Spring"
date: 05-01-2020
location: "Evanston, IL"
---
[Syllabus (PDF)] (/files/SESP310_Sp2020.pdf)

We've all heard that correlation does not imply causation, but what does that really mean? How do we measure the causal effect of a decision, treatment, or policy on a population? The goal of this course is to provide students with a toolbox for understanding quantitative empirical work, with a focus on the theory and practice of causal inference in the social sciences. We'll apply these techniques in-class using real data and modern data science tools. Students will read research papers from many disciplines and learn how to examine research designs, evaluate quantitative results, and analyze causal claims. By the end of the course, students should be able to not only digest and communicate the results of modern empirical work, but also be able to design research proposals to establish causal relationships.

_Topics Include_: statistical models in society; experimental design; selection bias; OLS regression; instrumental variables; differences-in-differences

_Required Prerequisites_: SESP 210 (or equivalent)

# Course Materials
- All readings and assignments will be posted on the class’ Canvas page
- Students will need access to a computer as the class will involve working in a Spreadsheet Software (i.e. Excel or Sheets) and R (i.e. R Studio or R Studio Cloud).

_Please contact the instructor if you need access to a computer during the course._

_Auxiliary Texts_ (not required; available through NU Library):
- Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J. S. (2014). Mastering metrics: The path from cause to effect. Princeton University Press.
- Stock, J. H., & Watson, M. W. (2015). Introduction to econometrics. Prentice Hall.

# Learning Objectives
Upon the completion of the course, students should be able to:
- Read, digest, critique, and communicate modern quantitative work.
- Utilize computational tools to collect, manipulate, visualize, and analyze data while considering the ethical and practical implications of such analyses.
- Discuss and design research proposals that take into account the limitations of quantitative methods in order to address real-world problems.

# Extraordinary Measures (Spring 2020)
Due to the COVID-19 Global Health Pandemic, Northwestern University has moved at least the first three weeks of the Spring 2020 quarter to an e-learning format. Because of this, much of the content of this course has been shifted around and edited. I ask that you treat this syllabus as a living document that is subject to change as we, as a learning community, adapt to our new environments. Any change will be posted promptly and I will notify you of those changes as soon as I can. At any point, if you think a change to the syllabus is detrimental to your learning in the course, please let me know as soon as possible.

# Academic Integrity
Students in this course are expected to comply with the policies found in the booklet, "Academic Integrity at Northwestern University: A Basic Guide." For details regarding academic integrity at Northwestern or to download the guide, visit: http://www.northwestern.edu/provost/policies/academic-integrity/index.html.

# Accommodations
Any student requesting accommodations related to a disability or other condition is required to register with AccessibleNU (accessiblenu@northwestern.edu; 847-467-5530) and provide professors with an accommodation notification from AccessibleNU, preferably within the first two weeks of class. All information will remain confidential.

If you require technological accommodations outside the scope of AccessibleNU due to the remote quarter, please contact the instructor as soon as possible.

# Grading

As per university guidelines announced on March 30, 2020, this class will be assessed using the Pass/No Pass framework. For more details on how this differs from quality grading, please visit the website of the Office of the Provost at NU.

That being said, we still map rough percentage values to grading in the class as a way of contextualizing the Quality Grading scale (A - F) in this new system. That breakdown is available on the first page of this Syllabus.

In this class, for most assignments, we will use what I refer to as the Check System:
- ✔    the student has completed an assignment adequately and accurately.
- ✔➖  the student has submitted an assignment, but it is either inaccurate or below average.
- ✔➕  the student has submitted an assignment that is above and beyond the expectations of the course.

If you are a student averaging ✔ level submitted assignments, you are not in danger of receiving a No Pass grade with regard to class and homework assignments. If you are receiving ✔➖s or not submitting assignments, you should contact the instructor to discuss how to get further support.

## Study Study Assignments
One the main learning objectives of this course is to be able to digest, question, and communicate about quantitative work.  In service of that goal, we will often be looking at real quantitative work from seminal studies in the fields of economics, education, public health, and public policy. I also welcome suggestions for topics or papers to include based on your own interests. I call these "Study Studies." To put it simply, you are studying a study–trying to understand what questions its authors are trying to answer and how they are communicating their results and limitations. In general, you should approach reading quantitative literature in the following order:
1. What question are the authors trying to answer?
2. How are they trying to answer that question?
3. How might you try to answer that question and what do you think the answer would be?
4. What was their answer? How is it similar/different than what you thought?

## Practical Assignments
Throughout the course, there will be between 5 to 7 assessment items that are considered "summative." You can think of these like an exam. Learning is about trying something, getting feedback, and improving. In service of that goal, you can re-submit a Practical as many times as you'd like. I will continue to regrade it until the end of quarter. After all, there are very few points in the real world where you get a single shot at something with no feedback. Shouldn't learning be a reflection of what people do in the real world? The hope here is that every student should be able to get a perfect score on all Practicals.

## Final Project – Communicating about Quantitative Analysis
For our final assessment, in lieu of a formal final exam, we'll be focusing on your ability to communicate about modern quantitative analysis. We have a diverse group of majors / interests in this class, so there are a few distinct options you can choose for your project. More details will be discussed in Week 7 of the course.

### Reading, Understanding, and Communicating about Literature (Path A)

Pick a piece of modern quantitative social science work. It could be a paper that we read in this class, something you read in another class, or perhaps just a famous experiment / analysis you've read about that you'd like to take a second look at. Your goal in this path will be to 1. Pick a source article / study, 2. Pick a target audience, and 3. Create a summary intended to communicate the design, analysis, discussion, and conclusion of your academic work to your intended audience. The summary can take the form of A) a written summary (approximately 8 pages double spaced) or B) a video/ voice over presentation (approximately 10 to 15 minutes long).

For example, if you're a Social Policy major, perhaps your target audience might be a politician or advocacy group and you might summarize an article written about the effects of changing the minimum wage. If you're in the Learning Sciences, perhaps you might write a summary of a paper talking about student teacher ratios and their effect on the classroom.

### Exploring, Understanding, and Communicating about Data (Path B)

Pick, explore, and write about an already existing data set. This is sometimes called "exploratory data analysis." How was the data gathered? What data might have been excluded whilst it was being collected? What variables are collected? What does the distribution of these variables look like across your sample? In this path, you must address what sorts of questions you might be able to answer using this dataset. What sorts of analyses would be possible with this data?  These are just some starting questions. Your work should be detailed enough to give a classmate an understanding of the data so that they could use it for a future analysis.

For this path, I still expect you to do some sort of A) a written summary (approximately 8 pages double spaced) or B) a video/voice over presentation (approximately 10 to 15 minutes long).
