---
layout: post
title: New Teaching Statement
date: 2024-05-01 00:00:00
description: a new take on my teaching statement
tags: teaching
categories: teaching-statements
tabs: true
---

At the core of my approach to teaching is a firm belief that students learn by constructing new understanding through modifying, reorganizing, and adding to their prior knowledge. By taking this constructivist perspective on learning, every student comes into my classroom not as a blank slate, but as a person with unique experiences and useful knowledge from which other members of the classroom can learn. This sets the foundation for an inclusive classroom focused on active inquiry and exploration rather than passive transmission of facts. This active inquiry is focused on the construction of some sort of personally meaningful artifact–an authentic manifestation of the knowledge the student has gained during a course that is created by exploring something that is important to them. By asking students to engage with their own interests by using the tools demonstrated during a course, I show that course content is not knowledge for knowledge’s sake but rather a collection of actionable items that can prepare them for new learning opportunities in the future.

## Teaching Experience

Teaching has always been a genuine passion of mine and was the key factor in my decision to attend graduate school in the Learning Sciences. As the first ever graduate of the joint PhD in Computer Science and Learning Sciences at Northwestern, the central point of my interest was the disconnect between expert-level knowledge and expert-level pedagogical practice – why does the former not entail the latter? Now as Assistant Professor of Instruction of Computer Science at Northwestern University, I teach some of the largest courses on campus. In the 2022-2023 academic year, total enrollment in my courses was around 1000 students or over 10% of Northwestern’s undergraduate population.

As a graduate student, I had a number of teaching experiences ranging from Introduction to Statistics (SESP 210) and Causal Inference (SESP 310) for the School of Education, to an interdisciplinary programming course, An Introduction to Multi-agent Based Modeling (COMP_SCI 372). My focus in each of these experiences was to help students develop a literacy in each course; where they left being able to see the world in a new way. I now follow this same process at an entirely different scale (about 325 students per quarter) in my COMP_SCI 110, Intro to Computer Programming. The course, in 10 weeks, takes students who have never programmed before and empowers them to not just tackle small computational tasks, but asks them to express themselves via computation. The course engages students by approaching programming languages as a set of basic blocks that can be combined together to make astonishing creations in addition to interacting with real-world data; all with a goal of seeing the world as computable and seeing themselves as capable of computing.

In COMP_SCI 111, Fundamentals of Computer Programming, the audience is quite different than COMP_SCI 110 and consists of Computer Science majors and other students from the school of engineering. One of the challenging aspects of this course, besides its size of 400+ students each Fall quarter, is that nearly 60% of students come in with some programming experience. This creates a tremendous skill-gap among students in the course. I tackle this problem in several ways: 1. Grouping students into Tutorial Teams composed of a variety of experience levels; 2. Supervising a staff of 30+ course staff; 3. Creating a culture of peer mentoring where students help each other learn rather than compete with each other; 4. Offering additional opportunities for advanced students to go beyond the syllabus topics and engage more deeply with CS fundamentals.

In my design of COMP_SCI 396, Communicating Computer Science, I aim to fill a large gap in typical collegiate computer science curricula: the study and practice of taking the technical topics and communicating those ideas with non-technical audiences. The course is centered on active learning with sessions focused on asking students to engage as critical consumers of existing media and as critical creators of new artifacts. The course culminates in a project, with examples ranging from a blog discussing the pros and cons of different programming languages, to a podcast on amplifying African languages in natural language processing, to lesson plans for K-5 students on the mechanics of machine learning.

## Building a Classroom Where All Students Can Learn

In my classrooms, I use three strategies to build an inclusive learning community. The first is emphasizing peer learning. By establishing all students in my classes as teachers in their own right, students both experience teaching a topic to another student as well as learning how to evaluate how others teach. This is in purposeful opposition to the usual instructor-student power structure. In both my large intro courses, each Wednesday we have in-class Tutorial exercises where students are grouped together and work to solve a programming task. These days are flipped in that students watch a short pre-recorded lecture (and complete a low-stakes embedded multiple-choice quiz) and then come to class to work together to complete the task. During these workshops we actively encourage students to engage in paired-programming, to help each other past road blocks they encounter, and to practice communicating programming ideas to other people (a key goal of both courses). Programming is often construed as a solitary and asocial act and these sessions are meant to uproot that idea.

The second strategy is emphasizing self-reflection. One of the hardest parts of learning is knowing what you know, and knowing what you do not know. In my classroom, I try to get students to actively think about what they have been learning over time. Every Friday in my large courses we have Practice+ Days. Using PollEverywhere we, as a class, work together to first break down a larger programming problem into parts and then solve each of those parts – each one meant to serve as a “checkpoint” for that week’s topic. By consistently reminding students in my courses to consider how their thinking is changing, students not only track their own learning, but can also better identify where they need the most help. Thirdly, my constructionist approach to learning frames learning experiences as building a toolbox in order to better understand ourselves and the world around us. Learners can then use these new tools to explore a topic of their own interest. In all of my courses, including 110 and 111 despite their large class sizes, I include significant project components where students choose what to work on, asking students to challenge and question the world around them

## Course and Lesson Design Strategies

When approaching the task of designing a new course, I follow a backwards design strategy: I first start by creating a series of learning objectives and only after I have decided on those learning objectives do I move on to the details of course timelines, activities, etc. For example, in COMP_SCI 110, I start with a given topic and then design an activity where students would need to both confront the theoretical aspects of the content and then actually apply the ideas to real data and situations. An important factor in my lesson design in this course was overcoming the students’ perceptions that they “weren’t computer people.” Each activity first focused on understanding the programming idea at work by showing students how they already understood this concept (for example, if statements in programming are simply branching logic structures that we as humans use constantly). Only after we ground the ideas in our experience do we move to the syntax of a particular language.

Unfortunately, computer science has suffered from systemic issues that have prevented many students from engaging in meaningful computational experiences. At the core of my course design is framing computation not as a tool reserved for the few, but as a way of empowering learners to challenge the world around them. A learner does not need to be a software engineer in order to to use computation to seek, explore, and challenge. Broadening participation in computing is more than just simply recruiting new students to the field. It also requires us to question and reimagine the ways we teach computation–to connect it to students’ lives in a way that they can see it as enabling themselves rather than as something that “other people” do.

## Assessing and Improving My Own Teaching

Just as students, courses, technologies, and textbooks are constantly changing, so too should my teaching. While end-of-course teaching evaluations are certainly useful in knowing how to fix problems in a course for the next iteration, in my own teaching I have found it is important to understand how the students are feeling on a finer-grained scale. Whenever we introduce a new topic in a class, I do an informal secret poll. I simply ask everyone to close their eyes and then ask them to raise their hands on whether we are going “too slow”, “just right,” or “too quick.” I believe that this simple strategy both gives me a better understanding of how students are feeling about the content as well as making it clear that they have a role in guiding the class. Additionally, at the end of Practice+ Days, I ask students to submit short reflections (1 I Got It!; 1 Needs Some Work!).

Getting formal and informal feedback from other teachers and colleagues is also a valuable experience since each teacher approaches their classroom slightly differently. As a graduate student in Northwestern’s Teaching Certificate Program and as a Searle Center Teaching Consultant, I had the opportunity to both observe other teachers and be observed myself which I have tried to also incorporate into my teaching as a faculty member. Finally, as an educational researcher myself, I both stay current with the educational literature of the field and find ways to ask and then answer questions about student learning in my own courses. My goal is to be a responsive teacher who consistently improves on course materials, assignments, and my own pedagogy to create a supportive and inclusive environment for all students.

## Future Pedagogical Work

In addition to actively publishing educational research focused both around my courses and research, I am currently working on two pedagogical related projects. The first is developing a new course in the Computer Science department focused on Pedagogical Practice in Computer Science Coursework. The course centers around the ideas in teaching computer science at the university level and is specifically targeted towards the Graduate TAs and Undergraduate PMs in our department that are looking for a way to more deeply engage with teaching. The first half of the course will be rooted in pedagogical theory with students working together to understand the past, present, and future of CS Pedagogy at the collegiate level. The second half of the course will be focused on a project that asks students to choose either a research or design pathway within the context of CS coursework offered here at Northwestern. Students might choose the research pathway with the goal of producing a short academic research paper on, for example, investigating students’ evolving perceptions of programming languages in COMP_SCI 110. A student in the design pathway might develop a tool for teaching assistants to keep track of student questions during office hours.

The second project is focused on identifying aspects of the current COMP_SCI 110 curriculum that might be re-imagined to better serve the growing student body in the course. From Winter 2022 to Winter 2023, enrollment in this class jumped 44%. While the course covers a large number of CS topics, there are many topics and fields of computing it does not cover that this expanding student body may be interested in. I will be working to identify those missing interests and designing ways of further engaging this non-major audience to become deeply involved with computing.
